

The Andean Southern Volcanic Zone:  a review on the legacy of the latest volcanic eruptions | Romero | Andean Geology

 

 

 

 

Home

About

Login

Register

Search

Current

Previous issues

Forthcoming Issues

      

Andean Geology is becoming an English-language journal

This transition will be effective starting July 1, 2026. All submissions but obituaries and comments, and those part of special issues, will be required to be submitted in English

 

Call for Papers

Special Issue:
 Advances in Paleontology in Chile: Opportunities and Challenges for a Synthesis

Edited by:

  - Marcelo Rivadeneira, CEAZA

  - Enrique Bostelmann, Sernageomin

  - Martín Chávez-Hoffmeister, CIAHN

  - Joseline Manfroi, CIAHN

  - Philippe Moisan, Universidad de Atacama

  - Karen Moreno, Universidad Austral de Chile

  - Sven Nielsen, Universidad Austral de Chile

  - Ana Valenzuela-Toro, CIAHN
  

- Natalia Villavicencio, Universidad de O'Higgins 

Submission status:
 Open between March 1, 2026, and November 30, 2026

Read more (pdf)

Special Issue: 
Geoethics in Chile and Latin America - Contextual reflections for responsible geoscience

Edited by:

- Luisa Pinto, Universidad de Chile

- Hernán Bobadilla, Politecnico di Milano

- Tania Villaseñor, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile

- Pablo Ramírez, Universidad de Chile

- Millarca Valenzuela, Universidad Católica del Norte

Submission status: 
Open between August 15, 2025, and April  30, 2026

Read more (pdf)

 

Search

All

Authors

Title

Abstract

Keywords

Full text

					About The Authors
			

Jorge E. Romero

 
https://sites.google.com/view/jorge-e-romero/home
 
Instituto de Ciencias de la Ingeniería, Universidad de O’Higgins, Av. Lib. Bernardo O'Higgins 611, Rancagua, Chile.		
Chile		

Francisca Vergara-Pinto

Humanitarian and Conflict Response Institute, University of Manchester, Oxford Road M13 9PL, Manchester, UK.		
United Kingdom		

Pablo Forte

Observatorio Argentino de Vigilancia Volcánica (OAVV), Servicio Geológico Minero Argentino-Conicet, Av. General Paz 5445, Parque Tecnológico Miguelete, Ed. 25, San Martín (B1650 WAB), Argentina.		
Argentina		

J. Tomás Ovalle

Escuela de Geología, Universidad Mayor, Av. Manuel Montt 367, Santiago, Chile		
Chile		

Florencia Sánchez

University of Minho, School of Sciences , Department of Earth Sciences, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.		
Portugal		

Keywords

Andes

Argentina

Biostratigraphy

Central Andes

Chile

Conodont

Conodonts

Geochemistry

Geology

Geomorphology

Neuquén Basin

Ordovician

Paleoenvironment

Patagonia

Precordillera

San Juan Formation

South America

Taphonomy

Tephra

Triassic

Volcanism

Information

For Readers
 
For Authors
 
For Librarians
 

Home
 >
	
Vol 51, No 2 (2024)
 >	
Romero

    							DOI:         

        http://dx.doi.org/10.5027/andgeoV51n2-3681
        

The Andean Southern Volcanic Zone:  a review on the legacy of the latest volcanic eruptions

Jorge E. Romero, Francisca Vergara-Pinto, Pablo Forte, J. Tomás Ovalle, Florencia Sánchez

Abstract

The Andean Southern Volcanic Zone (SVZ) concentrates many of the most active volcanoes of the Andean continental arc, as well as the region’s most recent and impactful volcanic eruptions. In this contribution, we briefly revise the general characteristics of the SVZ volcanism and provide a synthesis of the scientific findings related to the latest volcanic eruptions (<35 years) in this arc segment. These eruptions alone have inspired >430 peer-reviewed publications with over 9,000 citations, with large-magnitude (VEI 4-5) eruptions being the most studied. Our study shows that SVZ research has been primarily focused on environmental and atmospheric impacts (29%), eruption descriptions and physical volcanology (20%), volcanic hazard and risk assessments (15%), and other investigations complementary to volcanology. Whereas the least silicic eruptions (e.g., Llaima 2008-2009 and Villarrica 2015) shed light on magma replenishment and degassing dynamics controlling eruption styles, intermediate eruptions (andesitic-dacitic) offered clues on either rapid or slow eruption initiation, with relevant findings on phreatic-to-magmatic style transitions and eruption triggering mechanisms. On the other hand, silicic (i.e., rhyolite-rhyodacite) eruptions provided unique observations on rapid magma ascent, high-rate magma extrusion, rheology, fragmentation processes, and style transitions. These recent eruptions have also inspired a new generation of tephrochronological, tephrostratigraphical, and physical volcanology studies, aimed at assessing the long-term (kyr-scale) evolution of the volcanic systems and their associated hazards. We debate how the knowledge gained from research and the long-term human coexistence with volcanoes are relevant to reducing volcanic risk in the SVZ. Finally, we discuss how challenges and opportunities emerging from other disciplines can complement our understanding of volcanism in this active region.

Keywords

Volcanic eruptions; Volcano monitoring; Volcanic ris; Southern Andes; Chile; Argentina

How to cite this article

		Romero, J.; 		Vergara-Pinto, F.; 		Forte, P.; 		Ovalle, J.; 		Sánchez, F. 
			        2024,
        The Andean Southern Volcanic Zone:  a review on the legacy of the latest volcanic eruptions.
Andean Geology 	 51 
    	        	 (2)            	: 379-412.                        	 
            	 [doi:
https://dx.doi.org/10.5027/andgeoV51n2-3681
]
                             

 

                PDF

                HTML

Andean Geology, ISSN: 0718-7106
Journal Edited by Servicio Nacional de Geología y Minería
 
Chilean Government
 
 This work is licensed under a 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
.

 

